docs: add AI database versioning guide (#3809)
neondatabase/website: content/docs/ai/ai-checkpoints.md

---
title: Using Snapshots as checkpoints
subtitle: Implementing AI agent checkpoints with Neon snapshots
enableTableOfContents: true
updatedOn: '2025-08-12T14:09:12.290Z'
---

<ComingSoon/>

## Overview

> This guide is for platforms building AI agents and code generation tools (like Replit Agent, v0, Lovable, Create.xyz). It explains how to implement database checkpointing using Neon's Snapshot API with the **active branch pattern** - an approach that avoids the complexity of traditional database branching. See a working implementation in the [demonstration repository](https://github.com/neondatabase-labs/snapshots-as-checkpoints-demo).

Reviewer: Create.xyz is now called Anything (https://www.createanything.com/)

- **Cost-efficient**: Snapshots charge only for volume of changes between checkpoints, matching the checkpoint pattern perfectly

## Concepts and terminology

### Neon core concepts

- **Project**: Neon project that owns branches, computes, and snapshots
- **Branch**: An isolated database environment with its own data and schema that you can connect to and modify
- **Snapshot**: An immutable, point-in-time backup of a branch's schema and data. Read-only until restored - you can query snapshot data but cannot modify it directly
- **Root Branch**: A branch with no parent (typically named `main` or `production`). Required for snapshot restores with `finalize_restore: true`
- **Operations**: Backend operations that return operation IDs you must poll to completion

### Pattern-specific terminology

- **Active branch**: The single root branch your agent always connects to. Connection string never changes
- **Preview branch**: Temporary branch created from a snapshot for safe exploration
- **Meta database**: Separate database/table that stores checkpoint metadata (prompt text, `snapshot_id`, etc.). Keeps audit trail across restores

> ## Core concept: The active branch pattern

Reviewer: Interesting, so we don't recommend several different branches in agent-controlled projects? I feel like even with agents it makes sense to move to a dev & prod branch environment long term where the agent build in dev and deploy to prod. Is this not something we can model right now?

    // Terminal states - safe to proceed
    if (['finished', 'skipped', 'cancelled'].includes(status)) return

    // Error state - handle appropriately
    if (status === 'failed') throw error

    sleep(5 seconds)
  }
}

// After restore API call
operationIds = restoreResponse.operations.map(op => op.id)
if (operationIds.length > 0) {
  operationIds.forEach(id => waitForOperation(id))
}
// NOW safe to connect
```

<Admonition type="tip" title="Working example">
See `lib/neon/apply-snapshot.ts` and `lib/neon/operations.ts` in the demonstration application at https://github.com/neondatabase-labs/snapshots-as-checkpoints-demo
</Admonition>

<Admonition type="note" title="todo">
**Visual Diagram: Operations Polling Flow** - Flowchart showing restore API call, operations returned, polling loop with state transitions (running → finished/failed), danger zones where connection attempts fail, and the final "safe to connect" state
</Admonition>

**Common restore errors:**

- **Connection to old state**: Ensure all operations completed
- **Target branch not found**: Verify branch exists
- **Operation timeout**: Retry with longer timeout

> #### Preview environments

Author: This is a key insight, thank you, I'm now reviewing the entire document and updating it. The definition was too strict as we are restoring to the main active branch (e.g., to keep same connection string) _and_ creating temporary preview branches from snapshots.

}
```

This creates a new branch with its own connection string for preview. The active branch remains unchanged.

### Managing checkpoints

#### List available checkpoints

Get all snapshots with IDs, names, and timestamps using the [list snapshots endpoint](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/listsnapshots):

```bash
GET /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots
```

**Path Parameters:**

- `project_id` (string, required): The Neon project ID

#### Delete checkpoint

Remove a snapshot using the [delete endpoint](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/deletesnapshot):

```bash
DELETE /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots/{snapshot_id}
```

**Path Parameters:**

- `project_id` (string, required): The Neon project ID
- `snapshot_id` (string, required): The snapshot ID

#### Update checkpoint name

Rename a snapshot using the [update endpoint](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/updatesnapshot):

```bash
PATCH /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots/{snapshot_id}
```

**Path Parameters:**

- `project_id` (string, required): The Neon project ID
- `snapshot_id` (string, required): The snapshot ID

**Body:**

```json
{
  "snapshot": {
    "name": "important-milestone"
  }
}
```

> #### Cleanup strategy

Reviewer: We should probably also mention here that restoring a snapshot creates a backup branch (`production (old)`) that also need to be cleaned up.

---
title: Using Snapshots as checkpoints
subtitle: Implementing AI agent checkpoints with Neon snapshots
enableTableOfContents: true
updatedOn: '2025-08-12T14:09:12.290Z'
---

<ComingSoon/>

## Overview

> This guide is for platforms building AI agents and code generation tools (like Replit Agent, v0, Lovable, Anything). It explains how to implement database checkpointing using Neon's Snapshot API an active branch pattern, which maintains a persistent root branch for production while using snapshots for checkpoints and temporary branches for previews. See a working implementation in the [demonstration repository](https://github.com/neondatabase-labs/snapshots-as-checkpoints-demo).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide is for platforms building AI agents and code generation tools. It explains how to implement database checkpointing using Neon's Snapshot API an active branch pattern, which maintains a persistent root branch for production while using snapshots for checkpoints and temporary branches for previews. See a working implementation in the [demonstration repository](https://github.com/neondatabase-labs/snapshots-as-checkpoints-demo).
```

Reviewer 2: Andre's repo is such a great complement to this guide. I wonder of we can make our call out to it more visible, maybe include a description of the app here.
Tying the docs closely to that example repo as much as possible would be great for users/readers.

Author: Good idea, now a demo section is near the top, and it is referenced in multiple places.

> This pattern works whether you manage Neon projects for your users (embedded approach like Replit) or users bring their own Neon accounts (BYON approach like v0).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This pattern works whether you manage Neon projects for your users (embedded approach) or users bring their own Neon accounts.
```

- **Backup branch**: Automatically created when restoring with `finalize_restore: true`. The previous active branch becomes `branch-name (old)` and can be safely deleted after verifying the restore.
- **Preview branch**: Temporary branch created from a snapshot for safe exploration, to preview a checkpoint
- **Meta database**: Separate database/table that stores checkpoint metadata (prompt text, `snapshot_id`, etc.). Keeps audit trail across restores

## Core concept: The active branch pattern

Every agent project maps to one Neon project with a persistent "active" branch as its production database:

**The active branch:**

- Gets its data replaced during rollbacks (but keeps the same connection string)
- Maintains a permanent connection string that never changes
- Must be a root branch (no parent) for snapshot restores to work properly

**The snapshots:**

- Capture point-in-time states of the active branch
- Store only incremental changes (cost-efficient)
- Can be deleted in any order (no dependencies)

> - Can be restored from either to the active branch, or a temporary preview branch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Can be restored to the active branch or a temporary preview branch
```

- Before database schema changes
- After successful operations
- User-initiated save points

### Restoring checkpoints

Restore any snapshot to the active branch using the [restore endpoint](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/restoresnapshot):

```bash
POST /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots/{snapshot_id}/restore
```

**Path parameters:**

- `project_id` (string, required): The Neon project ID
- `snapshot_id` (string, required): The snapshot ID

**Body parameters:**

- `name` (string): A name for the newly restored branch. If omitted, a default name will be generated
- `target_branch_id` (string): The ID of the branch to restore the snapshot into. If not specified, the branch from which the snapshot was originally created will be used. **Set to your root branch ID for rollbacks to preserve connection strings**
- `finalize_restore` (boolean): Set to `true` to finalize the restore operation immediately. This will complete the restore and move any associated computes to the new branch. Defaults to `false`. **Set to `true` when restoring to the active branch for rollbacks, `false` for preview branches**

<Admonition type="warning" title="Connection Warning">

> Do not connect to the database until all operations complete. Any connection attempt before operations finish will connect to the old database state, not your restored snapshot.

Reviewer 2: We should point to operations polling docs, like Andre has in his repo. This content can also be found in the docs here:
https://neon.com/docs/manage/operations#poll-operation-status
We haven't updated these docs in a while. I'd validate them against Andre's repo docs. 
Because this is critical to the flow, I wonder if we need an example directly in this doc (?)

</Admonition>

<Admonition type="note" title="todo">
**Visual Diagram: Rollback/Roll Forward Timeline** - Shows checkpoints on a timeline with the current position, arrows indicating rollback to past and roll forward to future checkpoints, warning zones for data loss, and the connection string remaining constant throughout
</Admonition>

#### Restore workflow

```json
{
  "target_branch_id": "br-active-branch-123456", // Your root branch ID
  "finalize_restore": true // Moves computes and preserves connection string
}
```

> Note: This shows a rollback to the active branch. For preview environments, you would omit `target_branch_id` and set `finalize_restore: false`.

Author: Thanks!

See `lib/neon/apply-snapshot.ts` and `lib/neon/operations.ts` in the demonstration application at https://github.com/neondatabase-labs/snapshots-as-checkpoints-demo
</Admonition>

<Admonition type="note" title="todo">
**Visual Diagram: Operations Polling Flow** - Flowchart showing restore API call, operations returned, polling loop with state transitions (running → finished/failed), danger zones where connection attempts fail, and the final "safe to connect" state
</Admonition>

**Common restore errors:**

- **Connection to old state**: Ensure all operations completed
- **Target branch not found**: Verify branch exists
- **Operation timeout**: Retry with longer timeout
- **Accumulating backup branches**: Delete old backup branches (e.g., `production (old)`) after successful restore verification

#### Preview environments

Create a temporary branch to preview a checkpoint without affecting the active branch:

```json
{
  "name": "preview-checkpoint-123",
  "finalize_restore": false // Creates new branch for preview without moving computes
}
```

This creates a new branch with its own connection string for preview. The active branch remains unchanged.

### Managing checkpoints

> #### List available checkpoints

Reviewer 2: Should we provide curl examples for each here and for other API calls? We could look at providing SDK examples in tabs  (e.g., TypeScript). Maybe we can ask Andre what thinks would be useful.

Get all snapshots with IDs, names, and timestamps using the [list snapshots endpoint](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/listsnapshots):

```bash
GET /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots
```

**Path Parameters:**

- `project_id` (string, required): The Neon project ID

#### Delete checkpoint

Remove a snapshot using the [delete endpoint](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/deletesnapshot):

```bash
DELETE /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots/{snapshot_id}
```

**Path parameters:**

- `project_id` (string, required): The Neon project ID
- `snapshot_id` (string, required): The snapshot ID

#### Update checkpoint name

Rename a snapshot using the [update endpoint](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/updatesnapshot):

```bash
PATCH /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots/{snapshot_id}
```

**Path parameters:**

- `project_id` (string, required): The Neon project ID
- `snapshot_id` (string, required): The snapshot ID

**Body:**

```json
{
  "snapshot": {
    "name": "important-milestone"
  }
}
```

#### Cleanup strategy

> Proper cleanup reduces costs and keeps your project manageable:

Reviewer 2: Cleanup is a key item in this use case. Can we provide an example?
We also need to see where we're at with the automatic deletion (ttl) for snapshots. We can ask Alec in the project snapshots channel.

| List checkpoints            | `GET /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots`                        |
| Delete checkpoint           | `DELETE /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots/{snapshot_id}`       |
| Update checkpoint           | `PATCH /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/snapshots/{snapshot_id}`        |
| Poll operation              | `GET /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/operations/{operation_id}`        |
| List branches (for cleanup) | `GET /api/v2/projects/{project_id}/branches`                         |

Full documentation: [api-docs.neon.tech](https://api-docs.neon.tech)

## Quick implementation checklist

- [ ] Create one Neon project per agent project
- [ ] Designate the root branch (main/production) as the "active" branch
- [ ] Store the active branch connection string and branch ID
- [ ] Create snapshots at key points
- [ ] For rollbacks: restore with `finalize_restore: true` and `target_branch_id` set to root branch
- [ ] For previews: restore with `finalize_restore: false` to create temporary branches
- [ ] Poll all operation IDs to terminal states before connecting
- [ ] Set up automatic cleanup with expiration dates

> - [ ] Document your restore window policy, when snapshots are set to expire

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Establish a restore window policy that defines when snapshots should expire
```

## Best practices

- **Root branch only**: Use the project's root branch as the active branch
- **Set target_branch_id for rollbacks**: When restoring to the active branch, always specify target_branch_id to prevent accidental restores
- **Poll operations**: Wait for terminal states before connecting to the database
- **Snapshot naming**: Use conventions like `checkpoint-{feature}-{timestamp}`
- **Cleanup strategy**: Set `expires_at` on temporary snapshots and preview branches. Delete backup branches (e.g., `production (old)`) created during restores
- **Meta database**: Keep checkpoint metadata separate to preserve audit trail

> ## Common questions

Author: Ah yes, thanks!

**Q: Why must I poll operations after restore?**  
A: With `finalize_restore: true`, Neon moves compute resources to the new state. Until operations complete, connections still point to the old compute.

**Q: Why must the active branch be a root branch?**  
A: Snapshot restores with `finalize_restore: true` currently require root branches. This is a platform requirement.

**Q: What happens to my active branch when I restore?**  
A: When restoring with `finalize_restore: true`, your current active branch becomes a backup branch with "(old)" appended to its name. This preserves your pre-restore state temporarily, but you should delete it after verifying the restore to avoid storage costs.

**Q: What if we need multiple preview environments?**
A: Restore different snapshots to new branches using `finalize_restore: false`. Each restore creates a new branch with its own connection string.

**Q: What is the restore window?**  
A: The time period during which you can restore, depending on snapshot expiration time. Snapshots outside this window cannot be restored.

## Summary

> The active branch pattern with Neon snapshots provides a simple, reliable checkpoint solution for AI agent platforms. By maintaining a persistent root branch for production operations and using snapshots for checkpoints, you get stable connection strings for your main database, instant rollbacks, and the flexibility to create preview branches when needed. The implementation is straightforward: create snapshots, restore with `finalize_restore: true` to the active branch for rollbacks, or with `finalize_restore: false` for preview branches. Always poll operations to completion before connecting. See the [demo repository](https://github.com/neondatabase-labs/snapshots-as-checkpoints-demo) for a complete example.

Reviewer 2: Deletion/cleanup is key in this use case, so we might want to mention that.
